---
title: "Introduction"
layout: page
---


<?cnx.eoc class="summary" title="Sections Summary"?>

<?cnx.eoc class="art-exercise" title="Art Connections"?>

<?cnx.eoc class="multiple-choice" title="Multiple Choice"?>

<?cnx.eoc class="free-response" title="Free Response"?>

 ![ Photo (a) shows a deer tick on a leaf. The tick has a brown oval body with a smaller, round oval toward the front. The head and legs are black. Photo (b) shows an arm with a red, circular rash enclosed in a ring-like rash. Photo (c) shows a brown mouse with a white belly and legs and large, round ears.](../resources/Figure_44_00_01abc.jpg "The (a) deer tick carries the bacterium that produces Lyme disease in humans, often evident in (b) a symptomatic bull&#x2019;s eye rash. The (c) white-footed mouse is one well-known host to deer ticks carrying the Lyme disease bacterium. (credit a: modification of work by Scott Bauer, USDA ARS; credit b: modification of work by James Gathany, CDC; credit c: modification of work by Rob Ireton)"){: #fig-ch44_00_01}

Why study ecology? Perhaps you are interested in learning about the natural world and how living things have adapted to the physical conditions of their environment. Or, perhaps you’re a future physician seeking to understand the connection between human health and ecology.

Humans are a part of the ecological landscape, and human health is one important part of human interaction with our physical and living environment. Lyme disease, for instance, serves as one modern-day example of the connection between our health and the natural world ([\[link\]](#fig-ch44_00_01)). More formally known as Lyme borreliosis, Lyme disease is a bacterial infection that can be transmitted to humans when they are bitten by the deer tick (*Ixodes scapularis*), which is the primary vector for this disease. However, not all deer ticks carry the bacteria that will cause Lyme disease in humans, and <em>I. scapularis </em>can have other hosts besides deer. In fact, it turns out that the probability of infection depends on the type of host upon which the tick develops: a higher proportion of ticks that live on white-footed mice carry the bacterium than do ticks that live on deer. Knowledge about the environments and population densities in which the host species is abundant would help a physician or an epidemiologist better understand how Lyme disease is transmitted and how its incidence could be reduced.

